Well, welcome to this session of
Core Animation Essentials.
My name is Michael Levy.
This is Tim Oriol.
We'll be doing this
presentation together.
I've really enjoyed
coming to these sessions.
I've just been amazed by some
of the stuff I've already
seen that you guys have done.
And I hope that the session we give you
will help you punch it up even more or,
if you're new,
help you get those same incredible apps
on both the Mac OS X platform and on iOS.
And before we even get into this talk,
I'm going to hand over to
Tim for our first demo.
All right, so for the first demo,
the whole point was just to give you
a taste of what kind of things you can
expect Core Animation to give you or
add to the current things you can do
with UIKit for your user interface.
What we have here is an app that
allows the user to select an item.
Here we have photos.
And of course,
we want to give good visual feedback
to show which item is selected.
So if we tap on one of the items,
you can see that the photo is enlarged.
And if you're only doing this,
you can do it and you probably
should be doing it with UIKit.
You change the bounds and
UIKit behind the scenes is
going to use Core Animation to
get this smooth animation.
So if you go to another photo,
the old one will animate down and
the new one will animate larger.
If we move to effect number two,
now when we tap a photo,
it's going to pulsate,
so it's going to shrink and grow.
And this you could do with UIKit,
but you're going to have
to mess around with timers.
And if you want to do this,
we're going to talk about the
CA media timing protocol later on,
which you can leverage to create
repeating animations to add to
your layers for a specific repeat
count or to repeat forever.
If we move to effect three,
now this is something you really
want to use Core Animation for.
One of the great things about
Core Animation is it gives you border
width and border color properties for
any layer that you have on the screen.
And as with most
Core Animation properties,
these can all be animated.
So we apply a repeating animation
and we're going to make the
border color light yellow,
dark yellow, light yellow, dark yellow,
and to sort of highlight
which one is selected there.
And now let's move to effect number four.
For 4, we get a card flip animation.
The layer is going to twist around in
3D space and we're going to bring it
up center and close to the user's eye.
This is using what we like to call
the 2.5D perspective transform that
you can set up in Core Animation.
It takes a little bit
of work to get set up,
but after that it's pretty intuitive
to position your layers on the screen.
Let's move to effect five.
Now when we tap on something,
you can see we have this sparkly
blue aura around the selected photo.
This is something you can
also do with Core Animation,
and I'm going to talk a little bit more
about that at the end of the talk today.
Thank you.
Back to Michael.
Okay, thank you, Tim.
So what are we going to cover today?
There's quite a lot to cover.
We thought we would go from really
from the beginning right through
to some more advanced topics.
So we've got a lot to cover.
We're going to try and pack it up.
So whatever your level of experience is,
hopefully there'll be something
for you in this session.
We'll start with fundamental concepts.
We have three parts to the talk.
At the very heart of it is
layers and layer properties.
We'll talk quite a bit about them.
And then, of course,
how you animate layer properties,
including a section
about what animation is.
We will then cover
topics in Core Animation,
including layers, 3D transforms,
and perspective, the presentation layer
versus the model layer,
notifications and timing,
and a little bit about performance.
And we'll end that section
talking about the core animation.
We'll talk about masks and shadows.
There are, of course, other topics,
and I urge you to look at previous
presentations for more information.
We just didn't have time
to get everything in.
And we'll end with a little
bit extra that's quite fun at
the end of the presentation.
So let's just start with the
architectural overview so you get
some sense of what core animation
really is and where it fits into
both the iOS and Mac OS X frameworks.
So, you know,
it's common to use this kind
of block diagram with UIKit or
AppKit at the top and the graphics.
And you can see that the graphics
hardware at the bottom and the
core animation is a framework,
and it fits in between there.
It uses core graphics.
It uses OpenGL, either ES or OpenGL,
depending on the platform.
And they, in turn,
talk to the graphics hardware.
But one of the great things
about developing for the iOS and
Mac OS X platforms is that your app
can always reach down from the top
level as far down as it needs to go.
Now, hopefully, the higher up you are
in this block diagram,
the more that's taken care of for you.
So you can get great effects
very concisely just using UIKit.
If you want to then punch it up again,
you can then drill down a little
bit into core animation and so on.
And the design philosophy of
core animation is to take all
those common and tricky tasks,
such as, for example,
doing the mathematical computation
of interpolation points and
making that all automatic for you.
How to do transformations
that do these great effects,
like the flip effect
that you saw on the card.
The details of that are all
taken care of for you inside
the core animation framework.
I won't talk about this slide a lot,
but just give you some sense of
what's happening behind the scenes.
It's what's called compositing.
That is, you have a bunch of layers
that the user will see,
but before each frame gets rendered,
there are a bunch of steps
that have to go through.
So, firstly,
there's a kind of sorting that
has to go on because layers
typically go on top of each other.
And as we'll see,
you can affect that positioning.
You have to merge the layer background
with the layer content and then
apply borders and shadows and so on.
And eventually,
the visual thing that you want to
show your user shows up on the screen.
And these steps may have to occur for
the production of every single frame.
And especially when you're worried
about getting good performance,
it's helpful to have this picture in
your mind while you do the design.
But let's just step back a bit
and go to the real basics of this.
And that is just what is animation.
Now, I'm going to use here what I'm now
calling the hello world of animation,
which is we're going to have a layer.
It looks like a ball,
and we wanted to do something like
drop to the bottom of the screen.
So, in core animation,
you achieve that in a very simple way.
You just change the position property
of the layer to a new position,
P, and that animation occurs,
and you get this nice, smooth animation.
Now, behind the scenes,
there are two important things that
have to be computed by core animation.
The one is the points,
the interpolated points,
and the second is the timing.
Now, by timing, I mean a kind of timing
function that controls,
how the animation appears to you.
Is it very jerky,
sort of infinite speed and then stop?
Or does it start going faster,
reach its maximum speed, slow down?
Well, you can control that with
timing function properties.
So, those,
and the defaults set for all of those.
So, normally speaking,
you don't have to worry about it.
You'll get good default behavior,
which will make your app look great.
But you can override it if you need to.
And then, of course,
once those things are known, then,
of course, what is animation?
Well,
it's just a matter of core animation,
producing all the intermediates.
So, you can do that by taking
the intermediate frames and
rendering them onto the device,
hopefully at a good frame rate,
like 60 frames per second.
So how do we do all this?
Well, let's start off with layers.
They're really at the heart of it.
And the layers in iOS come for free,
as it were.
Behind every UIView object is a layer.
And you can reach it by using
the layer property of the view.
And if you're just doing a standard
UIKit application and you have a draw
rect method for providing content,
then the draw rect is actually
rendering behind the scenes into
the layer that backs your UIView.
In Mac OS X, it's slightly different.
There you have to tell the
NSView explicitly that you want to
use a backing layer and you have to
tell it which layer you want to use.
After that, everything works identically,
both on Mac OS X and iOS,
with some minor exceptions
that I won't go into,
but are well documented.
So the CA layer hierarchy
looks like this.
I've left out some of the
subclasses that exist.
We'll talk about some
of these subclasses.
At the top is CA layer itself.
And that is not an abstract class.
You can instantiate CA layers.
And in fact, in many cases,
that's all you ever need to instantiate.
So in demo one, for example,
all we did is make nine, was it nine,
12 instances of CA layer,
populated them with content,
and that was it.
There was no need to write
any explicit drawing code.
And I'll talk about why that
happens and the advantage of that
in a couple of slides from now.
There are a couple of interesting
subclasses for specialized purposes,
like CA shape layer.
There's a lot of other things that you
can do with CA text layer and so on,
and we'll talk about some of
them during the presentation.
So let's move on to the next demo.
And the purpose of this demo,
very simple-minded one,
but just to start you thinking
about CA layers and how you might
use them in your applications.
I used a playing card because
I'm assuming that almost everyone
on the planet has seen playing
cards at one time or other,
so I don't have to explain too much.
So let's start with the first one.
[Transcript missing]
The layer and sublayering model is very
similar to UIView with the only exception
being that it's a lot more lightweight.
So it doesn't come with
gesture recognizers,
for example.
But otherwise it has a whole bunch
of very similar methods like the
ability to add sublayers so you
can have an arbitrarily nested
tree structure of sublayers.
You can insert sublayers
in different positions.
The default is to put them
one on top of each other as
the name layering would imply.
And then there are methods like
set needs layout which allows
you to reshuffle your layers.
Layout set needs display if
you want to force a refresh.
Very often that's handled
for you automatically.
But on occasion you'll make a
change that you have to explicitly
notify needs to be refreshed.
And if you subclass CA layer you
can implement a draw in context
method to provide explicit
context using Core Graphics.
A more common way to do it though
is to set the delegate property
in which case the delegate object
can if it wants to implement the
draw layer in context method.
And it can then provide
content for one or more layers.
The transform property is a very
important one and the transform
unlike Core Graphics is a three
dimensional transform matrix.
So there's three coordinates x, y, and z.
And in the part two of the talk we'll
talk about what we call the 2.5D model.
Um...
[Transcript missing]
We apply that,
we set the transform property
to be that composed transform,
set the position, of course,
near the bottom right,
and there's the heart pip.
And I leave as an exercise for you to
figure out how you would do the others,
pretty straightforward,
once you get the concepts
to do the rest of the card.
The layer geometry is
very straightforward,
important to understand.
Luckily, there's not too much to it.
The important concepts
are obviously the bounds,
which tell you the size,
the height and width of the layer,
the position, which is a point in the
superlayer's coordinate space,
the anchor point,
which I'm going to talk a
bit more about in a second,
and of course, this three-dimensional
transform property.
So, the anchor point, sorry,
let me just go back to the slide.
The anchor point is a point whose values,
whose X and Y values
range between 0 and 1.
And in the coordinate space
I'm showing above here,
which is the iOS 1, the default is 0.5,
0.5, which says place this in
the middle of the layer.
If you use, for example, 0, 0,
it would be in the top left-hand corner,
the 0, X, 0, Y.
If you use 1, 1,
it would be in the bottom right corner.
And where you set the anchor point
affects positioning in superlayers
and some of the property changes.
So, for example,
if we rotate around the center
with the default position,
you'd get what you expect
rotation around the center point.
But if the anchor point had been
set to the lower left-hand corner,
which you would do by
setting it to a point 0,
1, then we get a different
rotational effect.
We rotate, in that case,
with the same transform
around the bottom left corner.
So, if you use 1, 1, X, 0, Y,
which says place this in
the bottom left corner,
the 0, X, 0, Y.
of the screen, in this case a transform
around the z-axis again.
So that's my very quick
introduction to CA Layers.
Let's get on to the neat stuff,
the animation.
How do you do that?
So just to go back to
basics a little bit,
I've already showed that
frame-by-frame thing.
So if you stop and think about it a bit,
you'll realize that animation is
really the interpolation of a bunch of
points starting at an initial point,
going through some interpolated points,
and ending at a destination.
And we explicitly use the key
names from value and to value.
You'll see them crop up later on when
we talk about explicit animations.
There are in fact two styles of animation
in the Core Animation framework,
implicit animations and
explicit animations.
And we'll start with implicit animations.
Now supposing we have a picture here
and we wish to just... fade it away,
then we just do that.
It's declarative, you do that,
and the picture fades away.
Now notice it didn't disappear, it faded.
Maybe that was too quick for
you to see because it used the
default animation duration,
which is one second.
There is a class called CA Transaction
which lets you override those defaults.
And I'll use two of them now
because I'll do a slightly more
complicated implicit animation.
In fact, two implicit animations.
I'm going to move the image to the
bottom of the view and fade it out,
but with different timing.
I'm going to make the fade
last longer than the move.
So, and I do that like this.
Let's see if it works.
So notice,
I don't know if you could notice the
opacity going away as it was moving down,
but the idea is to move it in
two seconds and fade it in five.
And this is the code that
I would use to achieve that.
I chose this example to point
out an important little gotcha,
which is you can use CA Transaction,
to set properties,
and we'll talk about more of them,
the media timing properties.
One that you'll use very
often is animation duration,
but you have to remember that the
value that's in effect dynamically
at the time that your property change
is made is the one that will be used.
So if you took the myLayer.position
statement and put it one line above,
then it would use the
default one second value,
not the two second value.
And of course,
the advantage of that is you can
apply implicit animations using
different CA transactions values.
So what sorts of things can be animated?
I'll come back and talk about
CA Transaction a bit more as we proceed.
What are the sorts of
things that can be animated?
Now, I've used position a lot because,
as I said, it's the kind of hollow
world of programming.
But how many of you have ever shipped
in your application factorial?
I'm sure none.
But that's just the hollow world.
Now, of course, you will be repositioning
objects in your applications.
But remember that many other
sorts of things can be animated.
And I've just put together a composite
of a few of these to give you an idea.
So, for example, opacity,
which we've seen.
You can change size, position,
which we've talked about.
Nice one.
There's a nice rotational flip.
Shape is a fun one that you can
animate and even color change.
And if you look at the
documentation on a CA layer,
you'll see listed next to the various
properties the term animatable.
And that's your clue that that
particular property has interpolated
points that can be computed for you.
All the implicit animations that
you apply are done together in the
next invocation of the run loop.
So after your method's called,
it goes back to the run loop.
They're all applied as
a single transaction.
The CA transaction class
will let you control not just
duration but the timing function.
That is the type of
animation you want to do.
And a few more which we'll get
to in part two of the talk.
And as I've said,
the CA transaction properties
are applied at the time.
The implicit animation.
The implicit animation is created.
Sometimes you don't want an animation.
So for example,
if you have a gesture recognizer
that's -- and the user is moving
an object around the screen,
you don't want to lag while
the animation animates.
The point, you want that to be applied
as fast as possible.
So the way you do that is by calling
the CA transaction class method called
setDisableActions with the parameter yes.
And a little gotcha -- or it's
got me anyway -- is there's also
a method called disableActions.
And that's not a verb.
That will just tell you what the
current value of that property is.
So just remember you have to
say setDisable to yes or no.
Now, when you set that,
it only applies for the next run loop.
So if you want to have that
sort of in effect all the time,
you have to call it again
when you do it again.
So to understand implicit animation,
I thought I'd go inside
the mind of Core Animation.
Remember I showed that
little blobby brain there.
So we're looking inside
this brain a little bit.
What's happening behind the scene now?
This is something that you're
very unlikely to have to
do in your applications,
but it's helpful to understand
what's happening when you do an
implicit animation because it can
help you solve other problems,
which I hope to demonstrate
in the next couple of slides.
So there's a protocol
called CA Action Protocol,
and it deals with actions which are
objects that can respond to events.
And typically,
a typical kind of action is CA Animation,
which implements the action protocol.
And the basic method of
CA Action Protocol is
to execute an action.
And if an action is found when you
do an implicit property change,
then it's added to that layer behind
the scenes using add animation for key.
So let's go through this a bit.
So imagine you have a layer
and some property gets set.
Well, what the setter code,
the default implementation of the setter
code will do is send action for key to
a delegate if that layer has a delegate.
And that may or may not return an action.
If there's no delegate or it returns nil,
then the setter will then look
up in the action dictionary,
which is a property of CA layer.
And again, that may return nil.
A couple more steps and finally
it'll call the CA layer's
default action for key.
And these are, of course,
implemented in the framework for
all the animatable properties.
And when that action is returned,
it's then added to the layer.
as an animation where the key that's used
is a key value that corresponds to the
particular property that you've changed.
And we'll come back to this
slide in a few seconds.
You'll see how useful it is to understand
that little sequence of events.
But I just want to
reiterate that in your code,
you're unlikely to have to worry
about the CA Action Protocol.
Okay, so let's move on now
to explicit animation.
It's a more complex class hierarchy here.
In this case,
CA Animation is an abstract class.
In practice, you instantiate one of
the three leaves here.
The CA Animation Group,
CA Basic Animation,
or CA Keyframe Animation.
And I'm going to go back to my
Hello World example to illustrate
how you do this in practice.
Now, I just want to point out again that
I've already showed you how to drop
a ball using implicit animation,
and that was one line of code.
It's maybe two if you want
to change the duration.
So, you know, generally,
why write five lines of code when
you can write one line of code?
So, in practice,
you probably wouldn't do this particular
action with a basic animation.
But pedagogically, that is,
when I try and explain it,
it's a nice example because
it's easy to understand.
So,
that's the effect that I want to achieve.
Not implicitly, this time explicitly.
So, what I do is make an instance
of the CA Basic Animation class,
and I set the position.y as my key path.
So,
that's a key path that corresponds to the
y coordinate of the position property.
of the layer to be animated.
Of course, you can apply the same
animation to several layers.
And remember I said that an
animation has a from value,
a to value, and interpolated points.
Now with basic animation,
all you do is set the from
value and the to value,
and the framework will work
out the interpolated points.
And now instead of using CA transaction
for the animation duration,
we explicitly say that we
want the duration of this
animation to be five seconds.
We add that drop animation to
the layer and the key property
I don't need to fill in,
so I'll set that to nil.
And we'll see how we can make
different use of that later on.
Now, so that example will
achieve what you want,
except that in reality,
if you took exactly that bit of
code and stuck it into your project,
what you'd actually see is that.
And not quite probably what you expected.
Now, why did that happen?
Well, it happened because,
and this is important.
Explicit animations do not affect the
model values of your layer hierarchy.
They create animations,
but they leave your model unchanged.
And I'll come back to
this point a few times.
Now, this is great because it means you
can do all sorts of flying things,
it was around the screen and move
and follow gestures and so on.
And at the end of the day,
you haven't changed
anything in your model,
which is most often what you want.
But it can be irritating when you
hit this little effect and say,
what the heck's going on?
So we want to change the model value.
So we do that.
We do that by setting the position
to a new value at the bottom of
the screen as highlighted there.
And then as before,
we create the drop animation.
But we now are armed with the knowledge
from a couple of slides back of
what's happening behind the scenes.
And if you remember what I said is that
when you set a property implicitly,
there's a little bit of work
to go and retrieve an action
and then add it to the layer.
And furthermore,
it's added using a key that corresponds
to the property that you've changed.
In this case, position.
So.
By using the key parameter.
And by using the key parameter,
we can now change the animation.
And in the last call,
we effectively cancel the
animation that was scheduled
by the implicit model change.
And doing those two steps together
will mean that the ball will drop
and the model will be changed.
Now, if you don't want just these
default interpolated points,
a linear interpolation
from start to finish,
then you use keyframe animations.
And so here the picture
is a bit more complicated.
So the keyframes are a bunch of
points that you can set in two
ways that I'll explain in a second.
And you leave it up to the framework to
compute the interpolated points using
basically three different techniques.
So how do you set up keyframe animations?
Well, a keyframe animation class uses
either a path or a value of path.
There's a CG path.
And if you use the path property,
then the control points of the
path will be used as the keyframes.
Or you can explicitly set
a whole bunch of values.
And there's an optional flag, key times,
which lets you override
the default timing.
The default timing, I think, is linear.
So this will let you change the timing.
So you can have a long delay before
going to the first keyframe and
then very short to the next one.
And these are numbers that go from
zero to one fraction of the total
time for each keyframe segment.
And the interpolation is
either long values or the path.
And as I said,
three different interpolations.
Linear, which is what you think,
a straight line interpretation.
Discrete means no interpolation.
Just go from keyframe to keyframe.
And cubic fits a nice,
busier path to the keyframes.
And then finally,
the last part of that class
hierarchy was group animations,
which is a collection of
animations applied simultaneously.
And the timing is clipped
to the group timing.
So however long the animations
within the group are,
the overall animation will
just last as long as the
duration property of the group.
Very easy to do.
You create a whole bunch of animations.
You then instantiate a group animation.
And you set its animations properties
to be an array of your animations.
And then when you add them,
you set some duration for the group.
When you add that to the class,
all the animations will be applied
at the same time in the group.
Tim, so we have a demo that try to put
all these concepts together for you.
Thanks, Tim.
I just want to apologize for
implanting that little sound meme,
because you'll be humming
that for the rest of the day,
and my apologies for that.
But we chose that example.
It's somewhat bogus and made up,
but we chose it because what
I want to do is just walk through
some of the code snippets that
we used to put that together,
just to see how to put these three
types of explicit animations together.
So, now,
I made the song using GarageBand.
I used some synthesizers and some MIDI,
so pretty straightforward.
And the nice thing about using GarageBand
is I could set the tempo explicitly,
so I set it to 150
quarter notes per minute.
It's in 4-4 time.
I'm not much of a musician,
but I knew enough to be able to do that.
And so the bouncing ball itself,
we just did with a position animation.
And, as I have to confess, now,
you could compute these,
and that would be the right way to do it.
For the purpose of this demo, we just,
you know,
touch points and just recorded them
and then stored that all in an array,
so a bit of a cheat to do that.
In general, if you have arbitrary music,
of course, you have to do some font
metrics and figure out where
all the beats are and so on.
It's a bit more complicated.
And then we set the duration to be the
number of notes divided by the tempo,
convert that into second,
because the tempo's in minutes.
And, oh, yeah, this is lying a bit.
We started with cubic spline,
but you couldn't really see the
bounce points very well because
it was rounding all the corners.
So in the demo, I actually changed it
to linear interpolation,
so you get a more pointy appearance,
and it's more clear when
the ball hits the words.
And then for the opacity animation,
this was a bit more complicated.
In this case,
what we want to do is when the ball,
I don't know if you saw this,
but when the ball got
to the end of the line,
it sort of faded away and then moved
to the left and then reappeared.
So we had to set an animation that
went from one to zero and back again.
And so we did that with
an opacity animation.
And there's a little bit more
complication to work out.
We knew that each line had, I don't know,
four beats, two measures, I think.
Anyway, all the calculation done.
And once that's done, we used,
in this case,
used the values array for when
the opacity change would occur,
but the key times to
control the timing of that.
And then finally,
just to illustrate that,
I stick them in a group.
Now, we didn't have to do this.
We created a group.
We set the animations of the
groups to be bounce and opacity.
We set the duration to be the same as
the bounce duration because it used
the tempo and the number of notes to
compute the length of the whole song.
And then added it.
This is really more of a convenience.
We could have explicitly just
added those two animations,
but sometimes it's handy to
have them all in a group.
So, for example,
if you want to cancel all your
animations and you have them in a group,
it's very easy to do that.
Okay,
so that's what happened with that demo.
So let me just summarize this.
This is the end of part one, if you like,
introduction to Core Animation.
Let me just summarize what we've covered.
So we use CA layers for content
with a declarative style.
That means that when you
change layer property,
a whole bunch of work will
happen in the background for you,
almost always giving you exactly
the beautiful effect that you want.
If you want to start modifying
the default properties,
you can using the CA transaction class.
If you want to get even more fancy,
then you use explicit animations
of which there are three types:
CA Basic Animation,
CA Keyframe Animation,
and CA Group Animation.
All right, so now talk number two.
Now what I'm going to do here,
it may feel a little bit spotty,
I apologize for that,
but we try to pick topics that we
think will really give you a good
sort of overview of the more advanced
stuff that you might have to deal with.
There's more and I'd love to
have been able to cover it,
but it's just impossible in the
hour that we had to do this.
So we try to pick topics that we
thought were the essential topics,
and the first one of which
will be shown in the demo,
which is Perspective Transform.
And now Tim's going to do
a whole bunch of things,
and I'll just sort of give
some narrative as he do this.
So here we have five layers
with background colors
and some numbers in them,
and we move closer to them.
But now notice what happens.
Now when we rotate around,
we can see that there's perspective.
Perspective has been applied.
So the number one, for example,
is tapering off to infinity,
and number two is
expanding out towards you,
so it gives the user a sense of depth.
Now, in fact,
I said there were five layers.
There's actually a sixth
layer which we can expose,
and we do that by changing something I'll
talk about a bit called the Z position.
And to show you the sorts
of things you can achieve,
I assume that's what Tim's about to do,
we just close this little box.
Now, it turned out to be relatively
simple to achieve that.
The key was making sure the anchor
points of the layers that were going
to take part in closing the box,
you know, the back one just sits there,
but the ones on the sides and the
ones on the top move up and down.
And the key idea there was to put the
anchor points on the axes of rotation
that we were going to use and then
do a rotation around those axes.
And that really was all.
The lid, number five, that was simple.
That was just a matter of moving
it into the right Z position.
All these layers are identical size.
And we can open the box.
So again,
just the anchor point on number five
and do that rotation by pi by two.
But the nice thing about this is you can
see that you're getting another important
part of three-dimensional effect,
which is that the bits of the layers
that should be occluded from vision are.
So you can only see part of number six
unless Tim happened to rotate around.
And there you can see all of six.
So now this is all achieved.
Why is it called a two and a half D?
It's called that because this is all
achieved just using these a Z position,
which we'll get into plus a
certain perspective transform.
But the objects themselves,
the layer CIL objects
are not full 3D objects.
So unlike OpenGL.
So that's why it's called
a two and a half D model.
Do you have more to show us?
Okay.
So putting the back box back in order.
Okay, so let me just go into this
a little bit more detail.
So let's suppose we're
going to add three layers.
So I'll add a blue layer, a green layer,
and a gray layer.
Now, if I change these,
so there's this Z position,
which we've mentioned the default
value for the Z position is zero.
And if you're doing a
just straightforward 2D
application of Core Animation,
you won't ever worry
about the Z position.
We can change it.
So here I've set it to 500.
Remember, the Z axis comes directly
towards the viewer.
And therefore, that layer,
which was in between
the blue and the gray,
pops to the front.
But notice that it
didn't change its size.
And that's because in that demo,
I have not yet applied
any perspective transform.
So merely changing the Z position
will not give you any perspective.
How you get the perspective is
by using a property called the
sublayer transform property.
And you apply it to the parent layer.
So all the sublayers of that parent,
which has a sublayer transform property,
will be applied to the parent layer.
And then the sublayer transform
property set will have an appropriate
perspective transform applied to them.
The type of transform used is called
a homogeneous perspective transform.
And obviously, I'm not going to give you
a math lesson right now,
but if you enter that as a
search term in any search engine,
you'll get lots of good
references on that.
It's very commonly used.
All you have to do as an app developer
is really this next line over here,
which is you want to set the distance
of the viewer's eye or the camera,
if you like,
at some distance from the origin of
the Z coordinate along the Z axis.
And you do it with that statement.
So the thing IZ that you see there,
that's just a constant
that you've set somewhere.
So it's just a floating point number.
And it represents the distance of the
viewer's eye from the origin of the Z.
So if you set it at zero,
your face would be right
on the device like that.
And as it increases, the device,
you know, the apparent view of the object
gets further and further away.
And of course, that transform,
can be composed with other transforms
so you can get the sorts of rotational
effects that you're looking at
simply by doing a composition.
In this case,
just doing a straightforward perspective.
And now let's see what effect
that has on the same example,
except that we'll now use the Z position,
assuming that that sublayer
transform's already been set.
So firstly, I'll add the blue sublayer.
It looks like nothing's happened.
You can't tell yet.
But notice when I add the
green layer where I haven't
explicitly set the Z position,
it looks bigger.
And that's because this
perspective's been applied.
And similarly, if I set the Z position
of the gray layer to 100,
it will appear to be in front.
And now it starts to,
you can see why this is starting
to look like a sort of cover
flow or Time Machine has this,
exactly this kind of
perspective transform.
Of course, they're also,
the viewing perspective is
changed a little bit because
you're slightly to the left.
Otherwise, you just see the gray layer.
So that's why I say you can
compose these transforms.
poems.
What happens if layers overlap?
Well, it's supported,
but there are some gotchas.
It's a lot of extra
work for the renderer.
They're rendered more than once.
Now,
it works by using a depth sorting and
using the layer bounds and position to
determine what's occluded and what's not.
And if some of your sublayers don't
fit within the bounds of their parents,
it won't always get the rendering right.
So use with care.
As I said, it's not a full 3D model.
It's a 2.5D model,
but I hope the cube example that
you're seeing here is a 2.5D model.
At least it's convinced you that.
Nevertheless, there's lots you can do.
Okay, another topic,
which is an interesting one,
notifications and timing.
So how long do animations last?
How do you get a whole bunch
of animations to work in
coordination with each other?
What happens when they stop and so on?
So I'm just going to cover
those in a couple of slides.
And they all use the
CA Media Timing Protocol,
which is adopted both by
CA Animation and CA Layer.
And the typical properties,
I'll talk about begin time in a second,
repeat count, repeat duration.
Now, you use one or the other.
If you use overall duration
and repeat duration,
then it'll figure out how
many repeats there are.
But the idea of repeat count is,
for example,
with the bouncing ball example,
the moving the ball,
if I added a repeat count of 10,
then it would go up and down 10 times.
There's a duration,
which is how long it lasts,
and an auto-reverse,
which is handy if you're doing
some complex keyframe animation,
or a flip transform, for example,
because it'll reverse along
exactly the same path that got
it there in the first place.
And finally, fill mode,
which I will explain when I go through
another example a bit later on.
Now, in terms of notifications,
there are two mechanisms you use.
If you've created explicit animations
and the animation has a... You've
set the delegate of the animation,
then the delegate can implement animation
did start and animation did stop.
And they'll do exactly what you think.
When the animation starts,
the first one will be called.
And when animation did stop,
the second one will get called.
The finished flag will tell you
if the animation came to a safe,
normal end of life or was
somehow violently disrupted
for completing because,
for example, it was removed or
canceled for some reason.
So you can use that
flag for that purpose.
If you're using implicit animations,
you can use completion block,
which were introduced in iOS 4.
Of course, I think they've been on
OS X a bit longer than that.
So here's an example where I'm
doing two implicit animations,
setting the opacity to
zero and the position,
and I'm setting a completion block,
and in this case, it's disabling actions
and removing the layers,
doing some cleanup work.
Now, remember the important point.
You must call that before you change the
implicit properties because otherwise
the default block handler will be called,
and the default block
handler does nothing.
So remember to do that code first.
Now, I've just got a general principle.
It's tempting, and in fact,
when I started with this, I thought, oh,
animation did stop.
That's a very nice way
to chain things together.
In fact, it's not the best way to do it.
And in fact, best use of notification
is probably for setup and
teardown if you need to do them.
For timing, you can get much better
control using the CA.
It's called the Media Timing Protocol,
and I want to illustrate
that with this example.
So I have three balloons in my
little Carnival application,
and what I want to do is I want the
balloons to go up and down one by one.
So this is the effect
that I want to achieve.
So as the balloon drops,
the next one goes up,
and I could have many of these.
Now, I could do this by saying
animation did stop,
but the trouble with that is
it happens during the run loop.
It's not necessarily going
to happen immediately.
There may be other code going on,
and it's also architecturally
in my opinion.
And I think it's a very
nice way to do things.
So here's a much nicer way to do it.
Now, there's a bit more to understand,
so this is also a good
time to introduce that.
So let's start with time.
Now,
it turns out that every layer and every
animation also has a time coordinate.
So it's really a four-dimensional space,
if you like.
So the first thing you have
to do is make sure that your
layer is running in local time.
And there's the statement
that does the conversion.
I use a helper function
called CA current media time.
To give me the, if you like,
the machine's clock time.
I convert it using nil,
say globally convert
it to this layer time.
Now, I won't go into why there are
these different time coordinates.
But just to say that you can,
part of your layer hierarchy can
have different time parameters.
So for example,
a subtree could be running twice
as fast as everything else.
And you can get some very
nice effects doing that.
But I don't have time
to go into all of that.
However, it is important to get
the right time zone,
especially if you don't know for sure
what's happening above your layer.
In the layer hierarchy.
And then what I did with these
balloons is I'm going to animate the
position using a basic animation.
I'll make it auto-reverse.
I'll do it for five seconds.
And then I use the begin time property,
which I just glossed over
a couple of slides back.
And I'll set it to local media time, i.e.
now, plus k, where k starts at zero but
increments by five seconds.
For every occurrence of a
balloon in my array of balloons.
Okay, on that, we'll achieve that effect.
Now, there's one gotcha with begin time.
The default value is zero,
but that doesn't mean
that time starts at zero.
It means that the begin time will
be ignored if you set that to zero.
If you set it to anything else,
then begin time really reflects
the local time of that layer,
which may be machine time.
Here's another example which
has come up in practice.
Say you've got a scroller in your
application and while scrolling is
happening you have a heads-up display.
And when scrolling finally ends,
you want to fade that HUD away,
but you want to do it after, say,
a two-second delay.
So, sort of a real-world example.
So, firstly,
we set the opacity of the HUD to
zero because we do want the model to
be changed after this is completed.
I do the time conversion,
which I've already discussed,
and our animation will call fade out.
Its from value is 0.5, say,
and its to value is zero.
We want to make the
fade last five seconds.
And here's the key thing is we'll
set the begin time to now plus two.
So,
this animation begins after two seconds.
Now, there's a slight snag, though,
that's solved by the next statement.
It gives me a good opportunity
to explain fill mode.
And the snag is this.
If I didn't have this next statement,
and I just ran that code,
then there would be a two-second
delay before the animation kicked in.
Well, during that two seconds,
the HUD model has an
opacity value which is zero.
So,
when that's being rendered by the GPU,
it says, "What's the opacity?" "Oh,
it's zero.
Okay, go away, HUD." So,
the visual effect of that will
be that the HUD will disappear,
and then two seconds later it will
come back and start fading away.
Not an effect that you want.
So, that's solved by using
the fill mode property.
And you can just think
of fill as a function.
It's expanding your animation at each end
so that the from value or the to value
can be dragged out to fill the complete
duration of your overall animation.
So, in this case,
I'm just filling backwards
because once I'm done,
I don't care anymore because
I've changed the model value.
But there's also fill mode forwards
and fill mode both and fill mode none,
giving you, obviously,
coverage in all cases.
And then I just add
the opacity animation.
[Transcript missing]
There's a performance,
there's an instruments tool you
can use called Core Animation and
I'm going to skip this example
because I want to get on to Tim.
So, let's just move on to this one.
So, what we're seeing here is instruments
running on an actual device using
the Core Animation plug-in for
instruments and I've highlighted
a field called Color Blended
Layer and when I do that check mark,
the instruments will set
coloring where the red is bad.
So, red is showing me that I am
coloring the instrument.
So, I'm doing some color blending.
In other words,
I have a non-opaque field.
Now, this one's strange as a
developer because in fact the
two layers were almost identical.
They had the same content,
they had borders and yet one
is showing up with a red flag.
And if you look very closely,
you might notice the
difference between two of them.
I don't know if you can see that,
but the difference is
there's a corner radius.
And even though I set the layer
property opaque to be yes in both cases,
obviously as soon as
you set a corner radius,
you want whatever's behind that,
the outside part of the
corner to show through.
And instruments is telling me that.
And then as a developer,
I can make the decision of whether
it's really worth it depending
on where the performance is being
ruined or not to use corners.
And that's a judgment call I can make.
Now, I had an extra slide
on masks and shadows.
I just don't have the
time to go through them,
so a little unorthodox,
but let me whip through
these just to show you both.
Shadows and masks and hopefully
later you can review the slides
and get a little bit out of this.
And the reason I'm doing this is because
what I really want to do is hand over
to Tim now to show you some very,
very cool demos that he -- and I have
prepared bitmap caching as well.
Sad, but we'll move in.
So, Tim, I'm handing over to you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Michael.
I want to talk about two of the more
advanced subclasses of CA Layer.
Before we said most of the time
you're going to use CA Layer.
These ones won't be used nearly as much,
but they offer a unique set
of features and powerful
stuff you can do for your app.
So the first one I want to
talk about is replicators.
We have a CA Replicator Layer which
offers the unique feature that it
will automatically create copies
of any sublayer that you add to it.
And this is the full hierarchy.
So any sublayer you add
to Replicator Layer,
it will automatically make copies of it.
So how do I control how many
copies it's going to make?
You want to look at the
property instance count.
Instance count is inclusive the total
number of copies of each sublayer.
So if I set instance count to one,
it's not going to make any copies.
So if I set it to three right now,
I'm going to get two additional copies
of any sublayer that I would add to it.
So I'm going to take this circle
layer and I'll add that as a
child of the Replicator Layer.
And so what the Replicator Layer is
going to go off and do is it will go and
make a total of three of these layers.
Now if you do exactly what
I just showed you here,
you'll see absolutely no
difference in your app.
Because by default, all these layers are
the exact same shape,
the exact same size,
and they're placed right
on top of each other.
So the whole idea is to
change them a little bit.
So the Replicator Layer offers
a number of offsets that you can
have applied to each of the copies.
The one that I'm going to
do first is a transform.
And so I'm going to create a transform
that basically just shifts the Y position
down by 50 pixels for each copy.
So what's going to happen is
the first -- the original layer
will remain at its position,
and then the second one
will be 50 pixels down.
And then the third one will be
an additional 50 pixels down.
So it's cumulative.
There's a number of other
offsets that you can set.
You can take a look at the
headers for all the options.
I'm going to show the
color offsets as well.
There's a green, red, and blue.
Here I have a layer that's
mostly blue and green,
and so I'm going to set a
green offset of minus 0.5.
So we're going to knock out 0.5 green
for the first copy that was made,
and then for the final
copy that was made,
all of the green is gone,
so it's a pure blue layer.
Where can you use these in their apps?
How are they useful?
A really good use for replicators is
for people that want to do reflections.
So you can see we can have a replicator
layer that has an instance count of two,
so we're going to make one copy,
and then you can have that
shifted down and faded out,
and we'll flip it in the Y.
So that way,
if you're playing movies in your layer,
if you add or remove other sublayers,
it'll dynamically update your reflection,
so you get this really nice
reflection once you set it up.
It's kind of for free.
The second one I want to
talk about is particles.
Particles you can use to create
complex effects like water,
smoke, fire, stuff like that.
And we introduced these
on the desktop before,
but now we're bringing them to iOS.
With iOS 5, you can now use particles.
I'm going to go over the basic
construction of how you'd
set up particles in your app.
The layer you want to use
is the CA Emitter layer.
This is the origin of your particles.
This controls where they are
going to be generated from.
So the properties you want to
look at are emitter position,
mode, and shape.
So the shape,
we have a number of supported
options such as line,
rectangle, sphere, cube.
So you pick one of those shapes
and then the emitter position is
where that shape will be located.
So that will be the middle of that shape.
And for emitter mode,
specifies where on or within that shape
we're going to generate the particles at.
So we have an outline mode
that if you have a rectangle,
it's going to be only generated
on the outline of the rectangle.
Or there's ones like area,
so we'll have it generated
anywhere inside the rectangle.
Or for 3D shapes like spheres,
we can do volume,
generate anywhere within
the volume of the sphere.
Those specify where the particles
are going to be generated at.
And then there's the
emitter cells property,
which is an array of CA emitter cells,
which you'll use to define
each of the types of particles,
how they'll look, how they'll behave.
And so for each of these emitter cells,
we have properties like velocity,
birth rate, spin, scale.
There's way more than this
you can take a look at.
But basically we want to tweak
these to create the unique
effect that you're going for.
The key ones, birth rate,
is how many particles per second
are going to be generated.
And contents you can
set to a CG image ref.
Usually you want to use a grayscale
image because that allows you to
take advantage of the color offsets,
the color properties to animate the
different colors of the particles.
And in addition to that,
each one of these CAE emitter cells
has an emitter cells property itself.
So what this means is that we can
have particles that emit particles
that emit particles for however
complex effects you want to go for.
And each of these are
their own unique particle.
You can set different
properties on all of them.
And you can use this to
create really complex effects.
And I'd like to show
you a couple of those.
The first one I've got set
up on here is a flame demo.
We've got fire running here.
And we have a particle that's
being drawn with not full opacity,
so we have this sort of buildup
of opacity as we have particles
go on top of each other.
And I've set it up so that
if we increase the slider,
we're going to be animating
the properties of these layers.
So we're going to animate the birth rate,
so we're going to get more
particles per second coming out.
I'm going to change the emitter
shape so it's going to be
generated over a wider area.
At the bottom to create a larger flame.
And obviously the lifetime
is going to be longer,
so we get a higher flame.
And as we start to increase it,
you'll notice a second type of particle
that I also have added for the smoke.
And this is a larger particle.
And you can see the spin we've added.
So it sort of looks like it's sort
of twisting around as it goes up.
So we have two types of particles here
being emitted from one emitter layer.
I want to move to the second demo now.
We'll go out with a bang.
This is a great example
of the nested particles.
So we have a single emitter at the
bottom here and it's emitting the first
type of particle is actually invisible.
There's no contents for it.
It has no color.
And this just follows the
arc of the firework going up.
And the reason you can tell it's
there is because it emits three
types of particles from itself.
So the first one is
that flare off the back.
And the second type of particles
is the actual explosion at the end.
And so we want a lot of particles
in a really short amount of time.
So we've used the CA media timing
protocol to make the duration
of that layer only .1 seconds.
And then we're going to use the
begin time to make it only occur
after a certain amount of time.
So after it's reached
the appropriate height,
then we're going to have like a
tenth of a second of generating
20,000 particles a second.
And we get a huge explosion there.
And then they'll fade out.
And then if you notice,
there's a final type
of particle at the end.
There's sort of a little flicker
after the explosion finishes.
And I talked earlier about the
different types of shapes that you
could use to emit these particles.
And I mentioned that
they're not all just 2D.
We can do all this in 3D as well.
So if you touch and drag on the screen,
you can see that we're
doing this all in 3D.
And so I'm going to hand
off this to you guys.
You can do this on all
of your new iPad apps,
and I'm sure you'll have
a lot of fun with it.
Thank you.
MICHAEL LEWIS: OK, so that is it.
The related session is the one that
some of you have just seen on UIKit,
which you can catch later
when you review the slides.
More information,
there are the contacts for you.
And I want to thank you for
your lively participation.
We both had a lot of
fun doing this for you.